# pyfzreader

Python reader of Whipple `GDF/ZEBRA` files, also known as `fz` files. This reader extracts the data written by the Whipple data acquisition system (GRANITE) into Python dictionaries. It has been tested on a small number of files taken between 1998-2000, but should hopefully work for runs before or after this time period. If you find an error while processing a file, please contact me and I'll try to update resolve the error.

The reader does not depend on any of the CERNLIB system, or on any nonstandard Python packages. The data is extracted by decoding the ZEBRA physical, logical and data-bank structures directly using the Python `struct` package. 

## Usage ##

There are two ways to use the reader, as a library which allows you to read and process data from `fz` files in your own Python scripts / Jupyter notebooks, or as a script to convert `fz` files into JSON format that can be read by any system that can process JSON.

### As a standalone JSON converter ###

To convert a file `gt012345.fz` into JSON you can use invoke `fzreader.py` directly as:

    python3 fzreader.py -o gt012345.json gt012345.fz

This file can then be read into Python. For example a crude script to calculate the pedestals and pedestal variances from pedestal events in the run is:

    import json
    import numpy
    nped = 0
    ped_sum = numpy.zeros(492) # Hardcode for 490 pixel camera in this example
    ped_sum_sq = numpy.zeros(492)
    with open('gt012345.json', 'r') as fz:
        for r in json.load(fz):
            if(r['record_type']=='event' and r['event_type']=='pedestal'):
                nped += 1
                ped_sum += numpy.asarray(r['adc_values'])
                ped_sum_sq += numpy.asarray(r['adc_values'])**2
    ped_val = ped_sum/nped
    ped_rms = numpy.sqrt(ped_sum_sq/nped - ped_val**2)

### Integrated directly into your analysis scripts ###

The library can be used to read `fz` files directly, skipping the conversion to JSON. For example the script above can be rewritten as:

    import fzreader
    import numpy
    nped = 0
    ped_sum = numpy.zeros(492) # Hardcode for 490 pixel camera in this example
    ped_sum_sq = numpy.zeros(492)
    with fzreader.FZReader('gt012345.fz') as fz:
        for r in fz:
            if(r['record_type']=='event' and r['event_type']=='pedestal'):
                nped += 1
                ped_sum += numpy.asarray(r['adc_values'])
                ped_sum_sq += numpy.asarray(r['adc_values'])**2
    ped_val = ped_sum/nped
    ped_rms = numpy.sqrt(ped_sum_sq/nped - ped_val**2)

## Format of data records ##

The following types of data record are supported by the reader and decoded into a Python dictionary: `Run Header`, `10m event`, `HV measurement`, `Tracking status`. In addition the `10m frame` is recognized by the reader but no data is decoded and a minimal dictionary is returned as described below. All other records result in the return a dictionary of the following type:

- `'record_type'` : `'unknown'`
- `'bank_id'` : Four character string describing data bank from the ZEBRA file. This corresponds to the bank name given in [GDF FORTRAN code](https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/24572fc741a8f360979dd816c0fdd3b668558353/gdf.for#L1048).

### Run header ###

The [GDF run header structure](https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/24572fc741a8f360979dd816c0fdd3b668558353/gdf.for#L263) is decoded into a Python dictionary that contains the following items:

- `'record_type'`: `'run'`.
- `'record_time_mjd'`: the MJD associated with the GDF record. This is seemingly generated by the DAQ system `GRANITE`, possibly from the system time on the computer. I do not know how accurate it.
- `'record_time_str'`: the MJD from the record translated into a UTC string in the form `'YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss.sss'`. 
- `'gdf_version'`: the version of the GDF library used to write the `.fz` file. For example, Whipple data written in 2000 has version 83. See the header for [gdf.for](https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/24572fc741a8f360979dd816c0fdd3b668558353/gdf.for#L93) for details.
- `'run_num'`: the run number
- `'sky_quality'`: the sky quality noted by the observers, if they remembered to update it. Should be `A`, `B` or `C`, but can also be `?` if the value is invalid.
- `'trigger_mode'`: value that describes the trigger mode (I don't recall what it corrsponds to).
- `'nominal_mjd_start'`: nominal start time of the run in MJD
- `'nominal_mjd_end'`: nominal end time of the run in MJD
- `'observers'`: string listing observers on shift that night. Not necessarily updated every night in the DAQ system, the logsheet is a better reference to who was observing.
- `'comment'`: comment entered into the DAQ system by observers.

Other data items present in the FORTAN structure are not decoded by the reader as they don't seem to be relevant for the data files that I have. Please contact me if you need any of them to be extracted.

### 10m event ###

The [GDF 10m event structure](https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/24572fc741a8f360979dd816c0fdd3b668558353/gdf.for#L458) is decoded into a Python dictionary that contains the following items:

- `'record_type'`: `'event'`.
- `'record_time_mjd'`: see above.
- `'record_time_str'`: see above. 
- `'gdf_version'`: see above.
- `'run_num'`: see above.
- `'event_num'`: event number, starting at zero.
- `'livetime_sec'`: number of seconds counted by 10MHz livetime scaler since start of run. The livetime scalar is gated by the system veto, so it only counts time when the trigger is ready to receive an event.
- `'livetime_ns'`: number of nanoseconds counted by 10MHz livetime scaler since last 1-second marker.
- `'elaptime_sec'`: number of seconds counted by 10MHz elapsed time scaler since start of run.
- `'elaptime_ns'`: number of nanoseconds counted by 10MHz elapsed time scaler since last 1-second marker.
- `'grs_data'`: raw data provded by GRS clock decoder. 
- `'grs_doy'`: the day of year decoded from the GRS system.
- `'grs_utc_time_sec'`: the number of seconds and fraction of seconds decoded from the GRS system.
- `'grs_utc_time_str'`: the time from the GRS system in string format `'hh:mm:ss.sssssss'`.
- `'event_type`': either `'pedestal'` or `'sky'`
- `'nadc'`: the number of ADC channels in the event. The ADCs each have 12 channels, so this will usually be larger than the number of pixels in the camera. For the 331 pixel camera `nadc=336`, for the 490 pixel camera `nadc=492`.
- `'ntrigger'`: number of trigger words in the event. This depends on what epoch the data comes from, before the Leeds PST or not, and whether trigger readout is enabled.
- `'trigger_data`': the trigger data words (I32).
- `'adc_values'`: the ADC values (I16)

Other data items present in the FORTAN structure are not decoded by the reader as they don't seem to be relevant for the data files that I have. Please contact me if you need any of them to be extracted.

### Tracking status ###

The [GDF tracking-record structure](https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/24572fc741a8f360979dd816c0fdd3b668558353/gdf.for#L375) is decoded into a Python dictionary that contains the following items:

- `'record_type'`: `'tracking'`.
- `'record_time_mjd'`: see above.
- `'record_time_str'`: see above. 
- `'gdf_version'`: see above.
- `'mode`': tracking mode, one of `'on'`, `'off'`, `'slewing'`, `'standby`, `'zenith'`, `'check'`, `'stowing'`, `'drift'`, or `'unknown'`.
- `'mode_code'`: integer code corresponding to mode
- `'read_cycle'`: integer giving cycle number of information transferred by tracking system.
- `'status'`: bit pattern giving tracking status (values unknown)
- `'target_ra_hours'`: right-ascention of target in hours from 0.0 to 24.0.
- `'target_ra_hms_str`': right-ascention of target as printable string in format `'HHhMMmSS.Ss'`, e.g. `'12h34m56.7s'`.
- `'target_dec_deg`': declination of target in degrees from -90.0 to +90.0.
- `'target_dec_dms_str`': declination of target as printable string in format `'+/-DDDdMMmSS.Ss'`, e.g. `'+12h34m56.7s'`
- `'telescope_az_deg'`: telescope azimuth angle in degrees.
- `'telescope_el_deg'`: telescope elevation angle in degrees.
- `'tracking_error_deg'`: estimated error between target and telescope in degrees.
- `'onoff_offset_ra_hours'`: right-ascention offset between ON and OFF runs in hours.
- `'onoff_offset_ra_hms_str'`: right-ascention offset between ON and OFF runs as printable string in format `'+/-DDDdMMmSS.Ss'`, e.g. `'+00h30m00.0s'`
- '`onoff_offset_dec_deg`': declination offset between ON and OFF runs in degrees.
- `'onoff_offset_dec_dms_str'`: declination offset between ON and OFF runs as printable string in format `'+/-DDDdMMmSS.Ss'`, e.g. `'+00h00m00.0s'`
- `'sidereal_time_hours'`: local sidereal time in hours.
- `'sidereal_time_hms_str'`: local sidereal time as printable string in format `'HHhMMmSS.Ss'`, e.g. `'12h34m56.7s'`.
- `'target'`: string giving name of target

Other data items present in the FORTAN structure are not decoded by the reader as they don't seem to be relevant for the data files that I have. Please contact me if you need any of them to be extracted.

### High-voltage status ###

The [GDF HV-record structure](https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/24572fc741a8f360979dd816c0fdd3b668558353/gdf.for#L303) is decoded into a Python dictionary that contains the following items:

- `'record_type'`: `'hv'`.
- `'record_time_mjd'`: see above.
- `'record_time_str'`: see above. 
- `'gdf_version'`: see above.
- `'mode_code'`: integer value corresponding to operating mode (values unknown).
- `'num_channels'`: number of HV channel values stored in record.
- `'read_cycle'`: integer giving cycle number of information transferred by HV system.
- `'status'`: array of size `'num_channels'` giving status of HV system for this channel. This is a bit-field described in the [GDF FORTRAN code](https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/24572fc741a8f360979dd816c0fdd3b668558353/gdf.for#L205).
- `'v_set'`: array of size `'num_channels' giving voltage set in each channel (negative value given).
- `'v_actual'`: array of size `'num_channels' giving voltage measured in each channel (negative value given).
- `'i_supply'`: array of size `'num_channels' giving measured power-supply current in each channel.
- `'i_anode'`: array of size `'num_channels' giving measured anode current in each channel.

Other data items present in the FORTAN structure are not decoded by the reader as they don't seem to be relevant for the data files that I have. Please contact me if you need any of them to be extracted.

### 10m frame ###

The [GDF 10m frame structure](https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/24572fc741a8f360979dd816c0fdd3b668558353/gdf.for#L413) is decoded into a Python dictionary that contains the following items:

- `'record_type'`: `'frame'`.
- `'record_time_mjd'`: see above.
- `'record_time_str'`: see above. 
- `'gdf_version'`: see above.

Other data items present in the FORTAN structure are not decoded by the reader as they don't seem to be relevant for the data files that I have. Please contact me if you need any of them to be extracted.

## Understanding the reader ##

To understand how the reader functions it may be useful to refer to the "Overview of the ZEBRA System" (CERN Program Library Long Writeups Q100/Q101), and in particular Chapter 10, which describes the layout of the physical, logical and data headers in "exchange mode".
 
https://cds.cern.ch/record/2296399/files/zebra.pdf

The format Whipple specific data structures, written to the ZEBRA data banks, can be extracted from the GDF code, written by Joachim Rose at Leeds, which directs the writing of the individual data elements in blocks of data all of whom have the same data type (blocks of I32, blocks of I16 etc.). See for example the function GDF$EVENT10 and observe the calls to GDF$MOVE.

https://github.com/Whipple10m/GDF/blob/main/gdf.for
